GATEWAY MODE

One thing that I'd like to add to the list of interesting projects is
an lsh gateway mode. The idea is that when you start lsh, you can tell
it to open one or more local gateways. A gateway is a unix domain
socket somewhere in the filesystem (preferable local, and with
paranoid file protection). You can then connect to the gateway, one or
several times. Below, the lsh process listening on this socket is
referred to as the "gateway lsh process", and processes connecting to
it are called "gateway clients".

On each connection to the gateway, you can send packets which are
inserted into the encrypted stream to the remote server. A little
filtering and bookkeeping by the local gateway lsh may be required,
but not very much. Relevant packets received from the remote server
are forwarded to the gateway client, and in this way some operations
can be "delegated" to the gateway client.

The most important operation that can be done through the gateway is
opening new channels; if a gateway client request opening a channel,
the local lsh delegates all packets associated with the new channel to
the right client.

All communications through the gateway are unencrypted. Only the lsh
process needs to know anything about key exchange and various
encryption methods.

The gains are:

1. Faster channel open times (no key exchange, or even tcp-connect
   roundtrips required). This can of course also be provided by a
   separate wrapper, like ceder's fsh.

2. Flexibility; you can request new forwarded ports, or use direct-tcp to
   tunnel new connections, without having to know that at the time the
   local lsh is started.

3. The gateway interface can be used by external programs implementing
   things like those described in the doc/configuration.txt file.

What seems a little more difficult, but doable, is delegation of
channels opened by the server (e.g. forwarded tcp ports, or X
forwarding). To do this, the gateway process must remember which
client requested which forwardings, and redirect the received channel
open messages to the right gateway client.

Another possibly useful feature is to create a similar gateway socket
also on the remote end of the lsh connection.
